---
title: Making Business Cards in Word Accessibly
layout: post
date: 2017-04-22
---
This has been a red letter year for me when it comes to company trips. This coming Tuesday I will be going to Kansas City for NIB's [Rehabilitation Engineering Forum](https://www.forsight.org/forsight-blogs/forsight-buzz/292-forsight-vision-takes-part-in-rehabilitation-engineering-forum.html). Heather and I are going to San Francisco for [Maker Faire]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2017-04-19-maker-faire %}) in May. Finally, we'll also be going to the [NIB Symposium](http://www.cvent.com/events/2017-national-symposium/event-summary-ae2614ab9ad2416c9e2cdfb9aac1cd79.aspx) in DC at the end of June. I have also had the opportunity to represent TAB at two job fairs and an accessibility testing event. One thing all of these have in common is that I am meeting new people as a representative of TAB. I need to allow for further communication. which brings me to business cards.

IN the ideal world business cards would be a thing of the past. We are going to be working in that "paperless office" any day now, right? Even as a blind person I find it much easier to ask for an old fashioned business card than to have a complicated conversation about which of myriad electronic tools we will use to exchange information. After the swap of the paper cards I can go back and use [KNFB Reader](http://knfbreader.com) to scan cards and import the information to Outlook or whatever the contact manager <span lang="fr">du jour</span> happens to be.

All the above brings me to the point of this post. I have been working on a non-visual way to make business cards that look good in Word. I don't like using templates because I don't have a way to understand exactly what I am looking at without sighted assistance. Most templates use features of Word that are right on the border between accessible and inaccessible. For example if you don't use an in line picture then it is difficult with JAWS or NVDA to manipulate the picture object. The challenge is to avoid making something that "looks like a blind person made it."

1. I started by generating  a very basic template for the [Avery 8471](http://www.avery.com/avery/en_us/Products/Cards/Business-Cards/Ink-Jet-Business-Cards_08471.htm) business cardstock I already had on hand using the Labels button on the Mailings tab. This created a two column five row table with all the margins and what not set to match the cardstock.
2. I edited the properties of the table so that the cell contents are vertically centered as insurance against overlapping the top or bottom of the cards. Because of the layout of the text I was going for I had to do a few other fiddly bits to handle the horizontal alignment.
3. Originally I intended to place my logo in the upper left corner of the card, but because it is a long thin rectangle it works better centered at the top of the card. As a bonus because there is no text to the left or right of the picture I did not have to remove the picture object from the text layer of the document. This means that JAWS and NVDA could tell me about the picture without having to use the Selection pane on the Layout tab.
4. I didn't want the logo to dominate the card so I scaled it down to 25% via the Size and Position command on the context menu while the picture was selected. This made it about 0.7" x 0.3". As the picture was  inline with text I was able to simply center it with Control+E.
5. I placed my name, job title, and company name under the picture with all of them centered. I chose to put all three in bold, but made the company name slightly smaller than my name and job title.
6. Through Paragraph Properties on the Home tab I set 18 points of extra After space on the paragraph with the company name in it. This way there would be some devision between the name info and the contact details.
7. I separated the street address from the building and suite number with a tab which I had to insert by replacing something else with a ^t in Find and Replace. I also right aligned the phone number with a tab. I wanted to put something on the right side of the card so that it looks balanced.
8. Again using my favorite Paragraph Properties box (Alt+H, P, G by the way) I hit the Tab button and set the first tab stop to a number just slightly less than my cell widths for both of the tabs. While I was in the Tabs box I set the tabs to be right aligning tabs with no leaders.
9. Finally I centered the email address at the bottom.
10. To help me keep track of the right-side-upness of the cards I rounded all four corners, but I used a larger radius round for the top left corner so I can quickly identify it by touch. This way the accessibility feature of the physical cards is subtle and adds a bit of flare as well.

Of course I did a lot more trial and error than is shown by that list, but don't you want to know what actually worked? There is no need to mention the dozen or so sheets of cardstock I printed on both sides with the bad versions. Also, Heather was invaluable as a visual reviewer. No matter how I thought the cards looked I am just not able to get millimeter precision for alignment from a screen reader. I hope that my experiences with this little project may encourage you to come up with your own accessible Word design projects.